The 2000 Sydney Olympic Games promised so much and delivered so much more. As a city, Sydney was transfixed and transformed. As an Olympics, the Games were unforgettable.

The doubts and questions raised before the Games quickly dissipated when the Olympic flame finally arrived at Uluru. There, 1996 Olympic hockey gold medallist, Nova Peris-Kneebone, the first torch runner, chose to jog bare footed – a gesture to the sacred ground and to her people and to Aborigines in general – and Australia was swept away on a wave of Olympic euphoria.

The Australian team comprised 632 athletes and 374 officials and was represented in all sports. They marched behind basketball’s Andrew Gaze and watched women’s dual hockey gold medallist Rechelle Hawkes recite the athletes’ Olympic Oath and Australian water polo referee Peter Kerr recite the officials’ Olympic Oath.

Together with a crowd of 110,000, they watched Cathy Freeman light the Olympic cauldron in a truly memorable and spectacular Opening Ceremony.

By the time the Olympic flame was finally extinguished, Australia had won a record Games haul of 16 gold, 25 silver and 17 bronze medals. The team finished fourth on the medal table and earned medals across a record number of 20 sports.

The swimmers led the way with five gold medals. They were won by Susie O’Neill in the 200m freestyle, Grant Hackett in the 1500m freestyle, while Ian Thorpe ended the Games with three golds after winning the 400m freestyle and was a member of the victorious 4x100m relay team alongside Ashley Callus, Michael Klim, Chris Fydler, Todd Pearson and Adam Pine and the 4x200m freestyle relay team with Klim, Pearson, Hackett, Bill Kirby and Daniel Kowalski.


On Sydney Harbour, both men’s and women’s 470 class sailing crews of Tom King and Mark Turnbull, and Jenny Armstrong and Belinda Stowell, were successful, Kerri Pottharst and Natalie Cook rejoiced in the women’s beach volleyball, the equestrian three-day event team, comprising Andrew Hoy, Matt Ryan, Stuart Tinney and Phillip Dutton, showed its opposition a clean pair of heels, and the women’s hockey team maintained their Olympic gold medal dominance.

The women’s water polo team earned gold with an amazing last-second goal, the men’s Madison team of Brett Aitkin and Scott McGrory sprinted to victory at the velodrome, and Simon Fairweather, Lauren Burns and Michael Diamond stepped to the top of the dais in archery, taekwondo and trap shooting.

One of the most memorable gold medals at Sydney was captured by Cathy Freeman when she sent a crowd of 112,000 into raptures when sprinting clear in the women’s 400m at the Olympic Stadium.


The Games were an overwhelming success and IOC President, Juan Antonio Samaranch declared them as ‘The best Games ever." Never had truer words been spoken.

And if the euphoria of the Sydney Games had died down, it was uplifted two years later at the 2002 Salt Lake City Winter Olympics when Steven Bradbury won Australia’s first-ever gold medal on ice or snow in amazing circumstances in the men’s 1000m short track speed skating.

Then, Alisa Camplin, with her trademark warm, wide smile, added a second gold in the freestyle skiing aerials.

These gold medals were not a one-off for the Australian winter Olympic movement, but rather a result of long-term planning and investment. The fruits of the program produced another Olympic winter gold four years later when Dale Begg-Smith won the men’s moguls at the Torino 2006 Winter Games.


The golden glow of Sydney 2000 extended to the 2004 Athens Olympic Games where a team of 482 athletes and 285 officials were led by flag bearer, sailing’s Colin Beashel.

Australia retained fourth place on the medal table winning 17 gold, 16 silver and 17 bronze medals, eight medals fewer than Sydney 2000’s total of 58 medals but one gold medal more.

The swimmers and cyclists led the charge.

The swimming team earned seven gold medals with Jodie Henry collecting three gold medals in the 100m freestyle and as a member of the 4x100m freestyle relay team, in concert with Libby Lenton, Alice Mills, Petria Thomas and Sarah Ryan, and the 4x100m medley relay team alongside Giaan Rooney, Leisel Jones, Thomas, Brooke Hanson, Jessicah Schipper and Mills.

Ian Thorpe managed the 200m and 400m freestyle double, Grant Hackett successfully defended his 1500m freestyle title and Thomas bagged a hat-trick of gold medals in the 100m butterfly and two relays.

Six gold medals were captured in cycling with Graeme Brown and Stuart O’Grady defending the Australia’s Madison crown, Ryan Bayley won the individual sprint and the Keirin, Anna Meares edged home in the 500m time trial and the men’s 4000m pursuit team of Brown, Brett Lancaster, Bradley McGee, Luke Roberts, Peter Dawson and Stephen Wooldridge executed their plans perfectly.


Sara Carrigan dominated the women’s road race. Brown and Bayley thus became the first Australian cyclists since Russell Mockridge at Helsinki 1952 to win two gold medals at the same Olympics.

Rowers Drew Ginn and James Tomkins added more gold to their collections in the men’s coxless pairs, diver Chantelle Newbery claimed the women’s 10m platform, Suzanne Balogh shot outstandingly in the women’s trap, and the men’s hockey team finally captured their long-elusive gold medal.

Away from the Olympic Games and Winter Olympics, the AOC also looked to the future. It felt it needed to develop young athletes, aged 13–19, and provide a pathway across all member sports. As a result, the AOC initiated the Australian Youth Olympic Festival (AYOF) to be held every two years – a Festival which endured until the IOC established the Youth Olympic Games.

There were also changes within the AOC with Craig McLatchey (1995–2001) and Bob Elphinston (2001–04) both serving as Secretary-General before Craig Phillips was appointed to the position in 2004. John Coates was appointed to the IOC in 2001, a role he continues today.

A year after Sydney 2000, two-time swimming Olympian and gold medallist John Devitt stepped down from the AOC after serving 10 years as a Vice-President and five years on the Executive Committee.

The entry to the new millennium was the most successful period in the history of the AOC, and the catalyst was winning the bid to host the 2000 Games and delivering a festival of sport which united Australia in a once-in-a-generation manner and showcased the country and its people to the world.

 

Beijing and beyond
 

The challenge for the AOC and the National Federations, post-Sydney 2000 and Athens 2004, was for the Australian team to retain its top-five position on the medal table at the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games.

Australian sport invested wisely into funding programs leading into Sydney 2000, and the athlete performance legacy continued through to Athens 2004.

But could Australia continue to defy our comparatively small population base and the reduced government funding for sport to be positioned among the world’s top five Olympic heavyweight nations on the medal table?

The answer was ‘yes’ and ‘no’.

In Beijing, Australia finished fifth on the overall medal table winning 46 medals comprising 14 gold, 15 silver and 17 bronze medals behind host nation China, USA, Russia and Great Britain. However, on the gold medal count, Australia was eclipsed by Germany, which won 16 gold medals and 41 medals overall, and was placed sixth.

Australia’s team of 436 athletes was led by six-time Olympic rower James Tomkins, who carried the Australian flag in the Opening Ceremony.

Stephanie Rice became one of Australia’s most celebrated Olympians when completing a hat-trick of gold medals in the 200m and 400m individual medleys and in the 4x200m freestyle relay team with Bronte Barratt, Kylie Palmer, Linda MacKenzie, Felicity Galvez, Angie Bainbridge, Melanie Schlanger and Lara Davenport.


Rice’s triple-treat represented half of the six gold medals won in the pool with the remaining three earned by Libby Trickett in the 100m butterfly, Leisel Jones in the 100m breaststroke and the women’s 4x100m medley relay team of which Trickett and Jones were team members along with Emily Seebohm, Jessicah Schipper, Tarnee White, Galvez and Shayne Reese.

Australia again captured the 470 class sailing double once again through Malcolm Page and Nathan Wilmot in the men’s, and Elise Rechichi and Tessa Parkinson in the women’s, Emma Snowsill dominated the women’s triathlon and Ken Wallace stormed home to win the K1 500m – two days after winning bronze in the K1 1000m.

Australia enjoyed success at the rowing regatta with Scott Brennan and David Crawshay stroking to victory in the men’s double sculls, while Drew Ginn collected a third Olympic gold medal when winning the men’s coxless pairs with Duncan Free. 

And the Games finished on a high when Steve Hooker won the men’s pole vault and Matthew Mitcham produced the highest-scoring dive in Olympic history to move to the top of the podium in the 10m platform and deny China a clean sweep of diving gold.


The Games were the last for John Coates as Chef de Mission. Coates had guided the Australian team for a record six successive Games, and he stepped aside for dual rowing gold medallist Nick Green for the 2012 Olympics in London. Coates’ tally of six Games as Chef de Mission equalled the total of Winter Olympics as Chef de Mission by Geoff Henke (1976–1994).

In 2009, Coates was voted to a four–year term on the IOC Executive and, in 2013, appointed to a four–year term as an IOC Vice-President.

The 2010 Vancouver Winter Olympics brought more double gold joy for Australia and a record medal haul of three medals. Torah Bright carried the Australian flag at the Opening Ceremony and Australia’s hopes in the women’s halfpipe snowboarding event. And she performed superbly to capture the gold medal.


She was joined on the gold medal dais by Lydia Lassila who won the women’s aerials while Dale Begg-Smith earned a second Olympic medal – a silver in the men’s moguls.

The AOC’s responsibility also broadened beyond the Olympic Games and Winter Olympics and the domestic AYOF.

The IOC introduced the Youth Olympic Games  (YOG) to bring together the world's best young athletes and Australia sent a team of 100 athletes to the inaugural YOG which were held in Singapore in 2010.

The Games proved highly successful with the team winning eight gold, 15 silver and nine bronze medals.

Two years later, the first Winter Youth Olympic Games (WYOG) were held in Innsbruck and the 13-member Australian team performed commendably winning two bronze medals.

The winter sports program was buoyed further when the $50 million Icehouse development at Docklands, in Melbourne opened in February 2010. The short track speed skating program moved to the Icehouse and commenced on-ice training activities in August 2010 and the OWIA relocated its administration headquarters to the facility in early 2011.

When the 2012 London Olympics rolled forward, Australia entered the Games with the performance objective of a top-five finish on the medal table.

With basketball’s Lauren Jackson leading the 410-strong team, Australia won a total of 35 medals, comprising eight gold, 15 silver and 12 bronze, across 13 sports and disciplines and finished in a respectable equal seventh place on the overall medal table, and equal eighth on the gold medal count.


It was on the water where Australia achieved its greatest success. The men’s 470 class sailing crew of Malcolm Page and Mathew Belcher, again won gold and, in doing so, recorded the third Olympic victory in the class since Sydney 2000.

Iain Jensen and Nathan Outteridge triumphed in the 49er class and Tom Slingsby excelled in the Laser class.

Our swimmers didn’t enjoy the same level of success of previous Games, but the women’s 4x100m freestyle relay team of Alicia Coutts, Cate Campbell, Brittany Elmslie, Melanie Schlanger, Yolane Kukla, Emily Seebohm and Libby Trickett captured gold as did the men’s K4 1000m canoe crew comprising Tate Smith, David Smith, Murray Stewart and Jacob Clear, while cyclist Anna Meares’ class shone through when powering to gold in women’s sprint.


And there was also delight at the main stadium when Sally Pearson ran the perfect race to win the 100m hurdles.

An unusual slice of Olympic history was written when Jared Tallent was presented with the 50km gold medal on June 17, 2016 – more than 1,400 days after finishing in second place in London. First across the line, Russia’s Sergey Kirdyapkin, was subsequently disqualified for doping.

Tallent was awarded his gold medal in front of family and friends and a large crowd braving the rain on the steps of Melbourne’s Old Treasury Building. In addition to his medal, Tallent received a Medal of the Order of Australia from Governor-General Sir Peter Cosgrove.

Jared Tallent
 

Changes and challenges
 
Throughout its 100-year life span, the AOC has continued to evolve. It proudly looks to the past, plans imaginatively to the future while safeguarding the present. Following the 2012 London Olympics, a raft of new measures were implemented over the next six years across a range of areas to reflect today’s modern society.

Internationally, Kevan Gosper, a 4x400m relay silver medallist at the 1956 Melbourne Olympics and former AOC president, stepped down as an IOC Member in 2013 having served for 36 years since appointed in 1977. He also served two terms as a Member of the IOC Executive Board (1986–1990 and 1995–1999) and two terms as an IOC Vice-President (1990–1994 and 1999–2003).

In 2014, the AOC updated its Constitution “to recognise the heritage, culture and contribution of our nation’s first people, and to give practical support to indigenous reconciliation through sport.”

The role of women within the Australian Olympic movement also took an exciting new direction.

Olympian, Kitty Chiller, was named the first-ever female Chef de Mission for the 2016 Rio Olympics, and fellow Olympians Susie O’Neill, Alisa Camplin and Evelyn Halls were appointed Chefs de Mission of the 2014 YOG, 2016 WYOG and the 2018 YOG.

At AOC headquarters, Fiona de Jong assumed the reins as Secretary-General replacing Craig Phillips, who gave the AOC 23 years of service. Prior to her appointment, de Jong spent 10 years as the AOC’s Director of Sport.

While these initiatives were being implemented, the AOC was also working full steam ahead towards the 2014 Sochi and 2018 PyeongChang Winter Olympics, and the 2016 Rio and 2020 Tokyo Olympic Games.

Sochi 2014 saw Australia represented by a record 60 athletes. While no gold medals were won, the team equalled its best-ever medal haul of three medals, comprising two silver and a bronze.

The 2018 Winter team also collected two silver and a bronze at PyeongChang, South Korea and marked the seventh successive Winter Olympics where Australia has medalled. At the end of these Games, Australia had won 15 medals in Olympic Winter Games history – five gold, five silver and five bronze.

August 2015 marked the start of a new era of the Olympic movement in Australia with a refreshed AOC brand. For the first time in 60 years, the AOC modernised its brand following extensive research with athletes, fans and stakeholders.

While the catalyst for change was the introduction of new national emblem guidelines by the IOC, the AOC achieved alignment between its institutional, team and commercial emblems to create one vision, one team, one identity.

The 2016 Rio Olympic Games were challenging in many respects and AOC President John Coates described them as “the toughest assignment for an Australian Team since the political upheaval that plagued the Moscow Games in 1980.”

Four-time Olympian and gold medallist, Anna Meares, carried the Australian flag in front of 422 athletes competing in 26 sports. For the first time ever, there were more female (51%) than male (49%) team members.

Australia won eight gold, 11 silver and 10 bronze for a total of 29 medals across 12 sports and 13 disciplines. The team finished equal ninth on the gold medal scoreboard and eighth on the overall medal table.

Swimming returned as Australia’s primary source of gold medals with Kyle Chalmers winning the blue ribbon men’s 100m freestyle, Mack Horton was successful in the men’s 400m freestyle, and the women’s 4x100m freestyle relay team of Emma McKeon, Brittany Elmslie, Bronte Campbell, Cate Campbell and Maddy Wilson broke the world record when claiming victory.


Australia triumphed again in the Laser class in sailing, this time with Tom Burton, Kim Brennan stroked to gold in the single sculls, and Catherine Skinner survived a shoot-off to scrape through to the women’s trap shooting semi-finals before winning the final.

Rugby Sevens was introduced to the Olympic Games program for the first time and an outstanding Australian side upset New Zealand in the gold medal final, and history was created when Chloe Esposito snared Australia’s first-ever Modern Pentathlon gold medal.

Esposito’s victory was a special milestone as it was the 150th gold medal won by Australia in Olympic competition.


Towards the end of 2016, AOC Vice President Peter Montgomery announced his retirement from the AOC ending an illustrious contribution to the Australian Olympic movement dating back to his first of four Games as a water polo team member at Munich 1972.

Montgomery became an AOF Executive Board Member in 1990 and, in 2001, became Vice President. From 1988 to 1999 he was a member of the IOC Athletes' Commission and he was also a member of the Sydney 2000 Bid Committee and the IOC Coordination Commissions for the 1988, 1992, 1994, 1998, and 2000 Olympic and Olympic Winter Games. Montgomery was the Foundation President of the World Olympians Association and was a foundation member of the International Council of Arbitration for Sport from 1995–2001.

 

Barbarians at the gate
 

Planning for the 2020 Tokyo Olympic Games swung into action in 2017 with Ian Chesterman, who had been the Australian team Chef de Mission at all six Winter Olympics since 1998, appointed Chef de Mission for his first Olympic Games.

Also In 2017, the AOC completed an organisational, cultural and governance review, and experienced sports administrator, Matt Carroll, was appointed Chief Executive Officer in May, replacing Fiona de Jong who resigned in late 2016.

Despite the growing financial health of the AOC and the implementation of ground-breaking programs and initiatives, the Presidency of John Coates was challenged for the first time in 27 years.

At the time, public allegations of a culture of bullying within the AOC were being levelled in a vindictive media campaign designed to overthrow Coates at the 2017 annual general meeting and besmirch the reputation of AOC Communications Director, Mike Tancred.

Many believe it was part of an aggressive campaign orchestrated by the Australian Sports Commission to ultimately seize control of the AOC and the Australian Olympic Foundation’s net assets of $149 million.

Established in 1996, and boosted considerably by an injection of $88.5 million from hosting the Sydney Olympics, the Foundation enables the AOC to be financially independent of party politics and government direction, and preserves its autonomy from outside influences – key fallout lessons learned as a result of the highly politicised debate leading into the vote whether to attend Moscow 1980.

Standing against Coates was Olympic hockey gold medallist, Danni Roche, who was supported by AOC Executive members Andrew Plympton, Nicole Livingstone and Danielle Woodward. Despite bitter debate and public rancour against Coates, he comfortably won the Presidential ballot 58–37.

With the battle for President resolved, the AOC appointed an Independent Committee to investigate the bullying allegations. The Committee, comprising two former High Court judges and a Supreme Court judge, months later cleared Tancred of any bullying or harassment.

Following these take-over campaigns, the Foundation Board took further steps in 2018 to protect the Fund and preserve its autonomy from outside influences.

The Board amended the Trust Deed of the Foundation to include, among other measures, the prior written consent of 75% of the Guardians, who comprise AOC Life Members, to ratify distributions from the Foundation of more than four percent at the start of each four-year cycle. Approval from the Guardians is in addition to the 75% majority of the members of the Foundation Board.

In announcing the protective measures, Coates told the AOC’s 2018 annual general meeting the Foundation’s capital and ongoing distribution is secure.

He said; “It means the AOC is able to fund its activities independent from Government and free of outside pressures of any kind. It means our values are preserved – strong and uncompromised. To those with designs on raiding the Foundation – you are well served to look elsewhere. Put simply, our Guardians on the wall cannot be defeated by any Barbarians at the gate.”

The launch of Olympics Unleashed in September 2018 marked the AOC’s largest-ever commitment towards delivering education programs based on the principles and values of Olympism to Australian school children.


The AOC’s commitment followed the IOC’s Olympic Agenda 2020 recommendation in December 2014 where the IOC, under the leadership of President Thomas Bach, advocated the worldwide introduction of Olympic values-based education in school curricula.

The aim of the program is to take Olympians, and those athletes aspiring to compete at Tokyo 2020, into schools across the country.

Through a structured face-to-face program, athletes use their personal sporting journeys to demonstrate the lifelong benefits of goal-setting, developing resilience and pursuing personal passions.

Then in 2018, the AOC also created the Cecil Healy Award for Outstanding Sportsmanship at an Olympic Games. Tragically, Healy became the only Australian Olympic medallist to die in combat – at the Somme in 1918.

 

Tokyo 2020 and Beijing 2022
 

Leading into 2020, athlete competition quotas for the Tokyo Olympics were being earned, qualification processes were underway in many sports, and the countdown to the Games offered much excitement and anticipation for the Olympic movement.

However, the highly contagious COVID-19 virus took hold around the world, and on March 24, 2020, the IOC announced the postponement of the Tokyo Olympic Games by a year.

The AOC was well placed to withstand the impact of the postponed Games. National Federations revised preparations, the AOC staff recalibrated team arrangements, giving athletes the certainty they needed.

Significantly, the financial strength of the AOC commercial program and the Australian Olympic Foundation allowed the AOC to weather the economic impact of the COVID-19 storm, just as it did during the 2008 global financial crisis.

On April 16, the IOC and Tokyo 2020 announced the establishment of a Joint Steering Committee, led by IOC Coordination Commission Chair, John Coates, and Tokyo 2020 President Mori Yoshiro, to ensure the delivery of the postponed Games in 2021.

While the postponement was a disappointment to many athletes and presented a significant challenge to the IOC, Tokyo 2020, and the Japanese Government, the spirit of the Olympics and of Olympism rose again and united the world in a manner which only the Games can achieve.

For the AOC, its Member Organisations and the athletes, the postponed Games presented a series of unique challenges which were not merely limited to Team selection and pre-Games competition schedule changes

The AOC launched Project Wagasa (Japanese for umbrella) to manage the particular difficulties posed by the COVID environment long before departing to Tokyo, to ensure the best preparation and for all to safely arrive in Tokyo, compete and return safely home during a global pandemic.

To ensure the health and safety of athletes, Team members entered 14-day Staging Camps prior to departure to Tokyo, arrivals and departures into the Olympic Village were strictly enforced, while movements were restricted to the Village, designated sports venues, and Airport arrival and departure lounges.

Team members undertook daily COVID-19 screening tests and by the end of Games, Tokyo 2020 had completed 676,000 samples. If the Olympic Village was a country, it would have been the fourth most vaccinated nation in the world at that time, and a global leader in daily testing.

Despite the enormity of the logistical challenges faced by the Australian team under the leadership of the indefatigable Chef de Mission, Ian Chesterman, Australia was represented by 486 athletes – our biggest ever offshore Team and the second biggest behind the Sydney 2000 Team.


Prior to the Games, the AOC broke new ground when unveiling its ‘Reflect’ Reconciliation Action Plan and revealed its first ever Athletes Oath which was recited by team members.

A record 261 (53.7%) Tokyo Games Team members were female and a record 16 indigenous Australians earned selection including basketball’s Patrick Mills, who was named co-Flag Bearer for the Opening Ceremony alongside four-time swimming Olympian, Cate Campbell.

Because of COVID-19 restrictions, only 63 Australian athletes were permitted to march in the Opening Ceremony. However, there was an additional Australian athlete involved with pistol shooter, Elena Galiabovitch, a doctor and frontline medical worker, chosen by the IOC to represent Oceania as one of six athletes to carry the Olympic flag.

The Tokyo Games were a ‘bubble’ Olympics with spectators prohibited from attending events. Despite these unusual stadium settings, the Australian Team performed extraordinarily well capturing 46 medals including 17 gold medals, equalling the most gold medals won at a Games previously set at the 2004 Athens Olympics.

Swimmer Emma McKeon was Australia’s most successful athlete claiming four gold medals and three bronze to take her total Olympic tally to 11 medals, the most ever by an Australian. Her seven medals in Tokyo were also the joint most by a female athlete in Olympic history, equalling the record set by Soviet gymnast, Maria Gorokhovskaya, back in 1952.


There were further multiple women’s swimming gold medallists with Kaylee McKeown (3 gold, 1 bronze), Ariarne Titmus (2 gold, 1 silver, 1 bronze), Cate Campbell (2 gold, 1 bronze) and the Team’s youngest representative, 17-year-old Mollie O’Callaghan (2 gold), enjoying several climbs to the top tier of the medal dais in individual and relay events. Zac Stubblety-Cook was Australia’s sole male
swimming gold medallist when touching first in the 200m breaststroke final.

Australia enjoyed further success on the water with both the men’s and women’s coxless four winning gold in rowing, the men’s K2 1000 pair of Thomas Green and Jean van der Westhuyzen dominating the final, while sailing’s Matthew Wearn (men’s laser class), and Mat Belcher and Will Ryan (men’s 470) captured gold with splendid performances.


The Games also saw several first ever medals in BMX cycling (Logan Martin, gold men’s freestyle), skateboarding (Keegan Palmer, gold men’s park), boxing (Harry Garside, bronze men’s lightweight), surfing (Owen Wright, bronze men’s shortboard), men’s decathlon (Ash Moloney, bronze) while the men’s basketball team broke through to win the bronze medal with a stirring 107-93 win over Slovenia with Mills posting a remarkable individual haul of 42 points.

Eight-time Olympic equestrian, 62-year old Andrew Hoy, returned home with a silver and a bronze medal to add to his remarkable medal collection, Jessica Fox finally broke through to claim gold in the women’s C-1 canoe final, and the men’s hockey team was denied the gold medal when beaten 3-2 in a nail-biting penalty shoot-out with Belgium.


The Australian Olympic Team in Tokyo successfully avoided any COVID cases during the Games – a testament to the
athletes and Team management and the planning and foresight of Project Wagasa.

The Team returned safely, leaving Tokyo within two days of each cohort’s final events and into quarantine locations, where a full program of activities was rolled out on-line each day for the two weeks in isolation. Labelled “Quaranteam”, the program mixed fun activities with educational options and relaxation programs.


The lessons learned from the Tokyo Games greatly assisted the Australian Winter Olympic Team as they prepared for the Beijing Winter Games just six months after the Summer Games. Under the guidance of Chef de Mission, Geoff Lipshut, Australia was represented by 43 athletes across 10 disciplines comprising 22 women and 21 men.

Aerial skier Laura Peel and figure skater Brendan Kerry were named as the Australian Flag Bearers. The pair became the first dual Australian Flag Bearers in our Winter Olympic history with Kerry, the first Flag Bearer from figure skating, contesting his third Games.

Competing in her third Olympics, Laura Peel followed in the illustrious footsteps of another aerialist, Alisa Camplin, who carried the Flag at the Turin Games in 2006.


Like the Tokyo Summer Games, the Beijing Winter Olympics was conducted under stringent COVID-19 safety measures and ongoing athlete testing.

Despite the COVID-19 challenges, it was a history making Winter Games for Australia with the Team capturing its best-ever Winter Olympics medal haul of four medals comprising one gold, two silvers and a bronze.

Jakara Anthony capped off Australia’s greatest ever day at the Winter Olympics with the nation’s sixth ever gold medal when she dominated the women’s moguls competition, recording the top score in qualifying and then in all three finals. Her 83.09 in the super-final was three points clear of the silver medallist.


Anthony followed Steven Bradbury (2002), Camplin (2002), Dale Begg-Smith (2006), Torah Bright (2010) and Lydia Lassila (2010) as Australian Winter Olympic gold medallists.

Hours before Anthony’s gold, Tess Coady defied the pain of a fractured ankle to claim a brilliant bronze in the women’s snowboard slopestyle marking the first time Australia had won two Winter Olympic medals on the same day.

Jaclyn Narracott also made Australian Olympic history, claiming our first ever medal in a sliding sport when capturing the silver medal in the women’s skeleton final, while Scotty James also earned the silver medal in the men’s snowboard halfpipe, four years after taking bronze in the event at the 2018 PyeongChang Winter Games.


Australia fielded its first ever curling team of Tahli Gill and Dean Hewitt at the Beijing Games – the pair overcoming adversity with positive COVID tests disrupting their campaign to win their final two matches.

Every athlete who arrived in Beijing was able to compete in their chosen events despite of the COVID-19
environment.


The Beijing Winter Team set new marks for top five and top six results and equalling the record for top ten results.

The combined outstanding performances of the Australian Summer and Winter Teams demonstrated the resilience and dedication of the athletes despite the challenges of COVID-19 and set a positive course ahead for the 2024 Paris Summer and the 2026 Milano-Cortina Winter Games.

 

Brisbane 2032, the New Norm and a new era
 

In 2018, the IOC adopted reforms titled the New Norm to further develop its ambition to ensure hosting an Olympic Games was affordable, beneficial, and sustainable.

An IOC Session that year unanimously approved recommendation from the IOC’s Olympic Games Delivery Executive Steering Committee, chaired by AOC President John Coates, which reimagined how Olympic Games are to be delivered.

At the heart of the New Norm was the ambition to reduce the complexity and costs of hosting – including using existing venues and temporary venues – and maximising flexibility.

While the the 2020 Tokyo Olympic Games were originally planned well before the New Norm initiatives, New Norm thinking influenced a range of cost saving measures for the Japanese organisers leading into the Games.

IOC President, Thomas Bach, told the AOC annual general meeting in 2019 that bidding for a Games was previously like applying for a franchise. “We asked potential hosts how they would change their cities in order to adapt them to the Olympic Games. Now we ask them how we can adapt the Games to best fit the long-term needs of their city or region.”

Queensland’s ambition to host was born in 2015 when the Council of Mayors South-East Queensland began a feasibility study to explore the idea. The study, released in 2018, was the critical first step. The Federal Government expressed its support after Prime Minister Scott Morrison met with President Bach at the G20 Summit in June 2019.


Following the Queensland Government’s decision on December 9, 2019 to formally support a 2032 candidature to host the Olympic and Paralympic Games in south-east Queensland, the AOC and all three levels of government were aligned to take Queensland’s ambition forward to bring a third Olympic Games to Australia’s shores.

The Olympic Candidature Leadership Group (OCLG) was led by Prime Minister Scott Morrison (Chair), AOC President John Coates (Deputy Chair), Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk and Brisbane Lord Mayor Adrian Schrinner as Chair of the Council of Mayors, South-East Queensland along with Jock O’Callaghan, President of Paralympics Australia.

The key was to align Brisbane’s vision with the IOC’s vision, which was enshrined in the New Norm objectives. No longer did the IOC consider host Bids centred on one city, but instead on a region comprising several cities – a hub and spoke model.

“The IOC now doesn’t want to see cities wasting money,” said Coates. “They want to see cities using existing venues and if those venues are spread out a bit over a number of cities, and they’re existing and you can make do with them by supplementing them with temporary venues, then that is a better system.”

The AOC was convinced sport in Queensland, and across Australia more broadly, would be super-charged if the state were successful in persuading the IOC to stage the Games in Australia once again.

In February 2021, Brisbane’s well developed candidature received an important vote of confidence when the IOC’s Future Host Commission recommended only Brisbane be invited to the next phase as preferred candidate.

The Commission noted an excellent masterplan, good government support, good legacy plan and venues plans. This began targeted dialogue between the IOC Future Host Commission and the Brisbane 2032 partners to thoroughly examine the proposed plan for the Games.

There was still work to do to complete a detailed Questionnaire to the satisfaction of the Future Host
Commission.

There were further presentations to the IOC Executive where the plans were subject to questions on the detail provided, and finally, Brisbane’s date with destiny.

At the IOC’s 138th Session, held two days before the postponed Tokyo Olympics Opening Ceremony on July 21, IOC delegates voted overwhelmingly to confirm Brisbane as the host for the 2032 Summer Olympic and Paralympic Games. In a secret ballot, 72 delegates voted in favour, five voted against while three other delegates abstained.


The 2032 Brisbane Olympic Games are scheduled to be held between July 23 and August 8, 2032 while the Paralympic Games are slated between August 24 and September 5.

For Coates, the Brisbane 2032 candidature success completed a Bid circle which began when he was Executive Director for the 1992 Brisbane Olympic Games Bid, which was ultimately awarded to Barcelona. He made this promise to the IOC Members. “This is a very proud day for Australia, make no mistake. I thank the IOC Members for their confidence. Brisbane 2032 is genuinely committed to serving the ideals of the Olympic movement.

“The Olympic Games in Brisbane will be in the most diligent, grateful and enthusiastic hands. And I make this commitment to the athletes of the world – we will provide you with an unforgettable experience.”

Unlike host cities in the past, the 2032 Olympics will not be the sole reason for new development projects. Instead, south-east Queensland’s 20-year current infrastructure and urban development plan will accelerate because of the Games.

In 2032, Brisbane will rely on existing venues for 85 per cent of competition with the remaining venues either being upgraded or in the planning stage regardless of the Games.

Benefits will reach across south-east Queensland including the Gold and Sunshine Coasts, Redland Bay, Ipswich, Toowoomba, and the Scenic Rim.

Cairns, Townsville, Melbourne, and Sydney will host football group qualifying events, and cities across Queensland will host teams when acclimatising and preparing for the Games.

The operating cost for the Brisbane Olympic and Paralympic Games is projected to be $4.94 billion including an 18 per cent contingency of $808 million. With projected revenues from ticket sales, sponsorship, and licensing as well as a significant contribution from the IOC itself, the Games’ operational budget is forecast to break even.

The Games are modelled to deliver $8.1 billion in economic benefits to Queensland, including a $4.6 billion boost in tourism and trade, and a further $3.5 billion in social improvements.

Furthermore, the hosting of an Olympic Games offers many more intangible short-term and long-term benefits and legacies. The Games have the power to unite and motivate Australians, affect profound societal change, and create a special spirit of co-operation and harmony.


It is often stated that the character of Australia and of Australians is best reflected through our love for sport. We work hard to achieve, and we like to celebrate success. The Olympics is a special part of our national identity and a key feature of our rich sporting tapestry. Its unique spirit is an intoxicating brew, and its elixir binds us together whenever the Australian flag is hoisted, and when men and women wearing green and gold enter the field of play.

We are glued by the theatre and drama of Olympic competition, mesmerised by the speed, power and artistry of athletes, and we are inspired by their ambition and success. We cheer and rejoice when our athletes climb the podium, and we feel their pain when disappointment arises.

The Olympics is an on-going journey with no finish line in sight, and the AOC will continue to uphold the IOC’s values and ideals and promote its goal to contribute to building a peaceful and better world by educating youth through sport practised without discrimination of any kind and in the Olympic spirit, which requires mutual understanding, solidarity, and fair play.

